The Earth is the third planet from the Sun and the only place that’s inhabited by living things. It is the fifth-largest planet in the solar system, and it is the only world with liquid water on the surface. Among all the four planets closest to the Sun, the Earth is the biggest planet. The solar system consists of our star, the Sun, and everything bound to it by gravity – the planets Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune, dwarf planets such as Pluto, dozens of moons and millions of asteroids, comets and meteoroids. Below, we have provided CBSE Class 6 Geography notes for Chapter 1 – the Earth in the Solar System so that students can learn the concepts more quickly.

CBSE Notes Class 6 Geography Chapter 1 – The Earth in the Solar System PDF
Overview
At night the whole sky is filled with tiny shining objects some are bright, others dim. They all appear to be twinkling. A full moon occurs once in about a month’s time called Full moon night or Poornima. A fortnight later, you cannot see the moon at all, which is called New moon night or Amavasya.

Celestial bodies – The sun, the moon and all those objects shining in the night sky are called celestial bodies. Some celestial bodies are very big and hot. They are made up of gases.

Stars – Stars are celestial bodies which have their own heat and light, which they emit in large amounts. The sun is a star.

Constellations: In the night sky, various patterns are formed by different groups of stars called constellations. Ursa Major or Big Bear is one such constellation.

One of the most easily recognisable constellations is the Saptarishi (Saptaseven, rishi-sages). It is a group of seven stars that forms a part of Ursa Major Constellation.

In ancient times, people used to determine directions during the night with the help of stars. The North star indicates the north direction. It is also called the Pole Star. It always remains in the same position in the sky.

Planets – Planets are celestial bodies that do not have their own heat and light. They are lit by the light of the stars. The word ‘planet’ comes from the Greek word “Planetai” which means ‘wanderers’.

The earth on which we live is a planet. It gets all its heat and light from the sun. The moon that we see in the sky is a satellite. It is a companion of our earth and moves around it. Like our earth, there are seven other planets that get heat and light from the sun. Some of them have their moons too.

The Solar System
The sun, eight planets, satellites and some other celestial bodies known as asteroids and meteoroids form the solar system.

The Sun
The sun is in the centre of the solar system. It is huge and made up of extremely hot gases. It provides the pulling force that binds the solar system. The sun is the ultimate source of heat and light for the solar system. The sun is about 150 million km away from earth.

Planets
There are eight planets in our solar system. In order of their distance from the sun, they are: Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune. All the eight planets of the solar system move around the sun in fixed paths. These paths are called orbits. Mercury is nearest to the sun. It takes only about 88 days to complete one round along its orbit. Venus is considered as ‘Earth’s-twin’ because its size and shape are very much similar to that of the earth. Till recently (August 2006), Pluto was also considered a planet. However, in a meeting of the International Astronomical Union, a decision was taken that Pluto, like other celestial objects (Ceres, 2003 UB313) discovered in recent past may be called ‘dwarf planets.”

The Earth
The earth is the third nearest planet to the sun. In size, it is the fifth-largest planet. It is slightly flattened at the poles. The Earth shape is described as a Geoid. Conditions favourable to support life are probably found only on the earth. It has water and air, which are very essential for survival. The air has life-supporting gases like oxygen. From the outer space, the earth appears blue because its two-thirds surface is covered by water. It is also called a blue planet.

The Moon
Moon is the earth’s satellite. Its diameter is only one-quarter that of the earth. It appear so big because it is nearer to our planet than other celestial bodies. It is about 3,84,400 km away from us. The moon moves around the earth in about 27 days. It takes exactly the same time to complete one spin. As a result, only one side of the moon is visible to us on the earth. The moon does not have conditions favourable for life. It has mountains, plains and depressions on its surface. These cast shadows on the moon’s surface.

Asteroids
Asteroids are tiny bodies that move around the sun. They are found between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter. Scientists are of the view that asteroids are parts of a planet, which exploded many years back.

Meteoroids
The small pieces of rocks, which move around the sun are called meteoroids. Sometimes, these meteoroids come near the earth and tend to drop upon it. During this process due to friction with the air, they get heated up and burn. It causes a flash of light. Sometimes, a meteor without being completely burnt falls on the earth and creates a hollow.

A cluster of millions of stars is called the Milky Way galaxy. Our solar system is a part of this galaxy. In ancient India, it was imagined to be a river of light flowing in the sky. Thus, it was named Akash Ganga.

Galaxy – A galaxy is a huge system of billions of stars, and clouds of dust and gases. There are millions of such galaxies that make the Universe.

Globes are of various sizes and types such as big ones, small pocket globes, and globe-like balloons. The globe is not fixed and can be rotated the same way as a topspin or a potter’s wheel is rotated. On the globe, countries, continents and oceans are shown in their correct size.

A needle is fixed through the globe in a tilted manner, which is called its axis. Two points on the globe through which the needle passes are two poles – North Pole and South Pole.

The globe can be moved around this needle from west to east just as the earth moves. But, there is a major difference. The real earth moves around its axis, which is an imaginary line. Another imaginary line running on the globe divides it into two equal parts. This line is known as the equator. The northern half of the earth is known as the Northern Hemisphere and the southern half is known as the Southern Hemisphere. They are both equal halves.

The equator is an imaginary circular line to locate places on the earth. All parallel circles from the equator up to the poles are called parallels of latitudes. Latitudes are measured in degrees.

The equator represents the zero degree latitude. Since the distance from the equator to either of the poles is one-fourth of a circle round the earth, it will measure ¼th of 360 degrees, i.e. 90°. Thus, 90 degrees north latitude marks the North Pole and 90 degrees south latitude marks the South Pole.

All parallels north of the equator are called ‘north latitudes.’ Similarly all parallels south of the equator are called ‘south latitudes.’ The value of each latitude is, indicated by the letter ‘N’ or ‘S’.

Important Parallels of Latitude
There are four important parallels of latitudes

Tropic of Cancer (23½° N) in the Northern Hemisphere.
Tropic of Capricorn (23½° S) in the Southern Hemisphere.
Arctic Circle at 66½° north of the equator.
Antarctic Circle at 66½° south of the equator.
Heat Zones of the Earth
Torrid Zones – The mid-day sun is exactly overhead at least once a year on all latitudes in between the Tropic of Cancer and the Tropic of Capricorn. This area, therefore, receives the maximum heat and is called the Torrid Zone.

Temperate Zones – The mid-day sun never shines overhead on any latitude beyond the Tropic of Cancer and the Tropic of Capricorn. The angle of the sun’s rays goes on decreasing towards the poles. As such, the areas bounded by the Tropic of Cancer and the Arctic Circle in the Northern Hemisphere, and the Tropic of Capricorn and the Antarctic Circle in the Southern Hemisphere, have moderate temperatures. These are called Temperate Zones.

Frigid Zones – Areas lying between the Arctic Circle and the North Pole in the Northern Hemisphere and the Antarctic Circle and the South Pole in the Southern Hemisphere are very cold. It is because here the sun does not rise much above the horizon. Therefore, its rays are always slanting and provide less heat. These are called Frigid Zones.

What are Longitudes?
Meridians of longitude are drawn from the North Pole to the South Pole and are at right angles to the Equator. The distances between meridians of longitude are measured in degrees of longitude. Each degree is further divided into minutes, and minutes into seconds.

Prime Meridian is an imaginary line on Earth that passes north to south through the Greenwich Observatory in London, England. The prime meridian divides Earth into the Eastern Hemisphere and the Western Hemisphere. The prime meridian is at 0° (0 degrees) longitude. The longitude of a place is followed by the letter E for the east and W for the west.

Longitude and Time
The best means of measuring time is by the movement of the earth, the moon and the planets. When the Prime Meridian of Greenwich has the sun at the highest point in the sky, all the places along this meridian will have mid-day or noon. As the earth rotates from west to east, those places east of Greenwich will be ahead of Greenwich time and those to the west will be behind it.

The rate of difference can be calculated as follows. The earth rotates 360° in about 24 hours, which means 15° an hour or 1° in four minutes. Thus, when it is 12 noon at Greenwich, the time at 15° east of Greenwich will be 15 × 4 = 60 minutes, i.e., 1 hour ahead of Greenwich time, which means 1 p.m. But at 15° west of Greenwich, the time will be behind Greenwich time by one hour, i.e., it will be 11.00 a.m. Similarly, at 180°, it will be midnight when it is 12 noon at Greenwich.

Why do we have Standard Time?
The local time of places, which are on different meridians are bound to differ. In India, for instance, there will be a difference of about 1 hour and 45 minutes in the local times of Dwarka in Gujarat and Dibrugarh in Assam. It is, therefore, necessary to adopt the local time of some central meridian of a country as the standard time for the country. In India, the longitude of 82½° E (82° 30’E) is treated as the standard meridian. The local time at this meridian is taken as the standard time for the whole country. It is known as the Indian Standard Time (IST).
